# Creativity and emergence 

ABSTRACT: In this paper I attempt to highlight some connections between two seemingly unrelated topics, namely creativity and emergence. My essential claim is that if the underlying process (whether psychological or algorithmic) is not considered, both concepts describe the same phenomena, that is, the fact that for an epistemic agent something new has happened. In order to argue for this interpretation I relay upon the method of levels of abstraction, introduced in philosophy by Luciano Floridi as the fundamental method for philosophy of information, though our views on the matter differ slightly. Since this framework suits a computational description of phenomena perfectly, I draw some conclusions about creativity's necessary role in scientific discovery given a computational interpretation of these concepts.


//



> 
> The remotest discoveries of the Chemist, the Botanist, or Mineralogist, will be as proper objects of the Poet’s art as any upon which it can be employed, if the time should ever come when these things shall be familiar to us, and the relations under which they are contemplated by the followers of these respective sciences shall be manifestly and palpably material to us as enjoying and suffering beings. 
(William Wordsworth, Preface to Lyrical Ballads, 1800)


How is novelty produced in the world? One would tend to think that an answer to that question would depend upon what 'world' is taken to mean. That is, if 'world' refers to the natural world, the answer wouldn't be the same as if the question were referring to, say, the world of culture or even the world of social phenomena. In this paper I claim that, when viewed from a particular level of abstraction, specially defined to abstract away the underlying mechanism by which new phenomena actually arise, the process are analogous if not directly equivalent. In order to argue in favor of this view, I do as follows. First, I introduce a slightly modified view of Floridi's method of level of abstraction that I use to fix the vocabulary and introduce some essential notions, especially that of an epistemic agent operating at a particular level of abstraction. I then used this framework to discuss emergence on the one hand and creativity on the other. The former depicts the apparition of something new in the natural world while the latter is taken to mean the creation of something new in the world of culture or even in everyday life. The following section argues that, given a especially defined level of abstraction, creativity and emergence amount to fundamentally the same process, except for the fact that under emergence usually no intention is prescribed, whereas it is usually done to speak about creativity. But, since the level of abstraction explicitly leaves this intention outside the picture, an epistemic agent at that level of abstraction can make the claim that the novelty he experiences is fundamentally the same, that is, there would be no distinction about whether it comes from nature itself or from, say, an artist. In the final section, I remark how this general picture can be used to describe scientific discovery from a computational perspective, arguing that some form of creativity—now understood to be a constrained non-deterministic process—is required to deal with the inherent complexity of reverse engineering nature, given that the limited computational resources we have available precludes the ultimate success of any brute force discovery method. This last point can even be extended towards an 'in principle statement' when some results in theoretical computer science are accepted, for instance, Wolfram's principle of computational irreducibility.
